Microsoft Word (MS Word) is one of the most famous word-processing software. It allows its user to type text and manipulate it. MS Word first introduced the concept of WYSIWYG (What You See Is What You Get) by introducing text formatting and document preview exactly as we would get it on paper. It has advanced features like tables, images, advanced formatting, and reviewing that give its users the ability to customize their documents as required. 

The Page Layout Tab allows the user to control the look and feel of his or her document. The Page Layout tab has five groups of related commands namely Themes, Page Setup, Page Background, Paragraph, and Arrange.

A theme is a predefined set of formatting, colors, and settings that changes the overall design and look of the entire document. Applying themes to our work gives it a professional look. There are different themes available relevant to the type of document being composed.

Page Setup settings help us set the page layout properties such as margins, orientation, and size. The settings in this section are often applied throughout the document. 

A margin is the area or space between the main content of a page and the page edges. This button is used to change the margins of the entire document or selected section. 

Page orientation or print orientation is the placement of contents on a page. This button sets the contents of the page or section in portrait (Vertical) or landscape (Horizontal) layouts. 

The size button is used to choose the size of the paper for the current section or entire document. 

This button is used to split the text into two or more vertical columns. 

Breaks button is used to insert page, section, or column breaks in the document. 

This button is used to add line numbers on the left side of each line of the document. 

This button is used to specify how hyphenation in a document should be applied.

These settings are used mostly for special documents such as certificates, invitations, brochures, essays, etc. It consists of 3 buttons namely, Watermark, Page Color, and Page Borders.

The Paragraph Group is where we can modify all the settings of the paragraphs that appear in our document. This allows us to set a few basic paragraph styles and also adjust the indents and spacings.

A watermark is a faded background image that displays behind the text in a document. This button is used to insert logos, images, or text behind the contents of a page. 

This button is used when the user wants to apply a color for the background of the page. 

Page Border button is used to put a border around the page. 

Indent Left is used to define the amount of blank space (in centimeters) used to separate a paragraph from the left margin. 

Indent Right is used to define the amount of blank space (in centimeters) used to separate a paragraph from the right margin.

The buttons in the Arrange Group help the users to quickly arrange graphical and other elements of the document in relation to the main textual content.

Space Before is used to indicate how much space (in points) is added before the selected paragraph. 

Space After is used to indicate how much space (in points) is added after the selected paragraph. 

Position is used to place an object (picture or shape) on the page wherever you want. 

Text wrapping is used to arrange the text around an object like an image. 

Brings a selected object in front of all other objects. 

Sends a selected object behind all other objects. 

Selection Pane is used to select, show, hide, and change the order of objects in the document. 

Align is used to place objects like pictures, shapes, icons, etc. in alignment with margins, edge, or relative to another object in the document.

A Table of Contents (ToC) is an organized listing of the sections, groups, and headings of content in a document and identified by page numbers where they are placed. It provides an overview of the document and allows readers to go directly to specific sections or content in the document. ToC usually appears after the Title Page in a document. MS Word provides an advanced feature for automatically creating a ToC. A user can create an Automatic or a Manual table of contents in a document. To create a Table of Contents in MS Word document, go to the References Tab where Table of Contents button appears as the first option of that tab. MS Word provides several options of creating a ToC that include Automatic Table creation, Manual Table creation or the user can even create a Customized Table of Contents based on the requirements of the document.

Automatic Table creates a Table of Contents automatically based on the content used as Heading presets of MS Word. Based on the type of Heading, Automatic Table of Contents will create the appropriate levels and show page numbers where those Headings are placed. The only difference between Automatic Table 1 and Automatic Table 2 is the title of the table that is “Contents” or “Table of Contents”.

Choosing Manual Table from the Table of Contents menu will create a template of a generic table of contents. This table will need to be edited and defined manually by providing all the headings, sub-headings, and page numbers. To extend the table, simply copy and paste the template lines and edit them to preserve proper formatting.

MS Word 2010 helps in writing letters, applications, CVs, question papers, and books in default language set by Microsoft Windows (that is usually English). MS Word 2010 also supports typing text in various other languages like Urdu and Sindhi. To be able to write in other languages, the keyboards for those languages have to be installed in Microsoft Windows. MS Word also supports changing and setting its default language. To change the default language, go to the File menu and select Options. From the Word Options dialog box, select Language tab. Now choose one of the available languages as the default language for MS Word 2010.

Microsoft Excel (MS Excel) is a software that uses a spreadsheet system to organize, display, format, and calculate data using advanced features and formulas. MS Excel is a part of Microsoft Office Suite and integrates with other applications in the Office Suite. MS Excel offers advanced features to perform calculations, visualize data in graphs, and create pivot tables. It efficiently makes use of spreadsheets to organize, analyze, and store data in tabular and graphical forms. It is the most widely used spreadsheet system and has a high demand in many organizations for keeping records of data and presenting them as tables and graphs.

File Tab, Quick Access Toolbar, Ribbon, Column Header, Row Indicators, Status Bar, Worksheet Area, View Buttons, Zoom Slider, Help Icon, Title Bar.

Sorting is the process of rearranging or reordering data based on different criteria like size, quality, value, and quantity. MS Excel has the ability to sort data according to the needs of the user. To help better understand this concept, take or create a list of products with their unit prices and quantities. The objective is to sort this list of products with prices and quantities, in alphabetical order based on the names of the products. To achieve this, first select all the rows and columns which make up this product list then go to the Data tab and select the Sort option. In the Sort dialog box, choose Product from the Sort by dropdown list and make sure that in the Order dropdown list, A to Z is selected. Your data will be rearranged and sorted alphabetically based on the values in the Product column and their respective prices and quantities will also be rearranged as sorted data.

MS Excel 2010 allows its user to perform numerous calculations on data. Common calculations include addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division. Comparison of two numbers and finding their average is also possible. Formulas tell MS Excel what calculation needs to be performed on the data. Formulas always start with an equal sign (=). They are defined in the Formula Bar. To understand this concept, take an example of two numbers, which are 220 and 87, placed in columns A2 and B2, respectively. The objective is to add these two numbers using MS Excel formula. To achieve this, follow these steps:
1. Select cell C2.
2. Type = (equal sign).
3. Select cell A2 in the worksheet by using the mouse or the keyboard. This action places the cell reference A2 in the formula of the selected cell.
4. Type +.
5. Select cell B2 in the worksheet by using the mouse or the keyboard to put that cell's reference in the formula of the selected cell.
6. Press Enter.
7. The answer (307) will be calculated by MS Excel and displayed in the selected cell (C2) where the addition formula was composed. Likewise, subtraction, multiplication, division, and other mathematical functions can be applied.

Charts are also known as graphs. They include diagrams and tables. Charts feature in MS Excel allows the users to present a set of data visually. A huge set of data may not succeed in presenting its meaning to the reader whereas visual information helps better understand those data values at a glance. To understand this concept, take an example of the average monthly temperature for Larkana in 2018. The temperature table contains data in a form which is not very helpful for every user to understand. If the same data is converted into a graph or chart, the user would be better able to reach a conclusion. From the bar chart, we can easily derive the hottest and the coldest months and compare them with each other. The same data, if displayed as a graph or chart, will give more meaning and a user can easily derive an understanding of such values at a glance. Making this chart is very easy. All we need to do is to select the table and click at the chart button. There are many types of Charts. Four most common types of chart used are: Bar Charts, Column Charts, Line Charts, and Pie Charts.